Title: Binets formula Date: 2025-01-05 16:18Category: MathAuthors: AmirSummary: Deriving Binets formula for the Fibonacci numbers using operators.# Deriving Binets formula for the Fibonacci numbers using operators.The Fibonacci sequence starts by$$	F(1) = 1 \\	F(2) = 1$$and every following number is the sum of its two predecessors$$	F(n+2) = F(n+1) + F(n).$$But what do we do in case we cant to quickly calculate an arbitrary Fibonacci number? For finding such a formula we will reexpress the last property using operators. Therefore, introduce the translation operator $T$, thats$$	T f = f(x+1) \\	T^2 f = f(x+2) \\	...$$It take the next value of the function $f$, so it shifts it forward. Using $T$, the defining property of the Fibonacci sequence $F$ becomes$$	T^2 F = T F + F,$$which can be rewritten as$$	(T^2 - T - 1) F = 0.$$By calculating the roots of the polynomial $x^2 - x - 1$, we can factorize it, these are$$	R_+ = \frac{1 + \sqrt{5}}{2} \\	R_- = \frac{1 - \sqrt{5}}{2}.$$Interestingly, these numbers are closely related to the Golden ratio $\phi$ by$$	R_+ = \phi \\	R_- = 1 - \phi.$$And so, using these roots, the operator equation can be factorized as well and it becomes$$	[T - \phi][T - (1 - \phi)] F = 0.$$This equation is fulfilled if either one of the square brackets is equal to zero, so there are two solution functions, each one setting one of those brackets equal to zero.$$	T F_1 = \phi F_1 \\	T F_2 = (1-\phi) F_2.$$They are also called eigenfunctions of the translation operator, with eigenvalues $\phi$ and $1- \phi$. If we think about which functions get multiplied by a constant when we increase their argument then exponentials spring to mind, these are$$	F_1 (n) = \phi^n \\	F_2 (n) = (1-\phi)^n.$$A general solution $F$ to our operator equation will then be a linear combination of $F_1$ and $F_2$ by some real number coefficients $A$ and $B$, $$	F(n) = A F_1(n) + B F_2(n).$$Lastly we will have to get the specific values of $A$ and $B$ that correspond to the boundary condition $F(1) = 1$ and $F(2) = 1$. By plugging in, the relation can be expressed as a linear system of equations. Writing it in matrix form, we get$$\begin{bmatrix}F(1) \\F(2)\end{bmatrix}=\begin{bmatrix}1 \\1\end{bmatrix}=\begin{bmatrix}\phi & 1-\phi \\\phi^2 & (1-\phi)^2\end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix}A \\B\end{bmatrix}.$$Remember that $\phi$ was the solution to a quadratic equation, therefore there is an equation linearizing $\phi^2$, that is$$	\phi^2 = \phi + 1.$$The second quadratic expression can also be rewritten as$$	(1-\phi)^2 = 1 - 2 \phi + \phi^2 = 2 - \phi.$$And so the solution for our coefficients is obtained by taking the following matrix inverse$$\begin{bmatrix}A \\B\end{bmatrix}=\begin{bmatrix}\phi & 1-\phi \\1 + \phi & 2 - \phi\end{bmatrix}^{-1}\begin{bmatrix}1 \\1\end{bmatrix}.$$And we get$$	A = -B = \frac{1}{2 \phi - 1} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{5}}.$$Plugging back into the general form for $F(n)$ this finally yields Binets formula for the Fibonacci numbers $$	F(n) = \frac{\phi^n - (1-\phi)^n}{\sqrt{5}}.$$If we look at $\phi^2 - \phi - 1 = 0$ and divide by $\phi$, we get a linear expression for the inverse $\phi^{-1}$, that is$$	1 - \phi = -\phi^{-1}.$$And Binets formula can thus also be written as$$	F(n) = \frac{\phi^n - \left(-\phi\right)^{-n}}{\sqrt{5}}.$$