Title: Satellite heightDate: 2025-01-03 10:00Category: MathAuthors: AmirSummary: A quick rule of thumb (literally), to estimate the height of a satellite passing right over your head.# A quick rule of thumb, to estimate the height of a satellite passing right over your head.Assuming a perfectly circular orbit, a satellite around Earth is an object thats at an equilibrium of gravity and centripetal force. So this means that $$	F_\text{grav} = \frac{m v^2}{r} = GM \frac{m}{r^2} = F_\text{cpetal},$$where $v$, $m$ and $r$ are the velocity, mass and the height from Earths center of the satellite and the product $G M$ is the geocentric gravitational constant. Now, in case youre on the surface of Earth and the object passes right over you at a height of $h$, the distance $r$ is equal to$$	r = R + h,$$where $R$ is Earths radius. At this point we still need one parameter and thats the aparent speed or angular velocity $\omega$ of the object, this is$$	\omega = \frac{v}{h}$$for a satellite at distance $h$ from the observer.Putting all of this together, the mass of the satellite $m$ completely cancels out and we get$$	h^2 (R + h) \omega^2 = GM.$$This gives a cubic equation in $h$, that is$$	h^3 + R h^2 - \frac{GM}{\omega^2} = 0.$$This expression is solvable by expressing it as a depressed cubic and applying Cardanos formula, but since the solution is going to be an approximation anyways, it doesnt make much sense to obtain an exact equation. Therefore we notice that Earth radius $R$ is much larger than the height $h$ of most satellites that we can observe; $h$ is going to be around $200 \, \mathrm{km}$ to $1000 \, \mathrm{km}$, but $R = 6371 \, \mathrm{km}$. We go a step back and approximate$$	h^2 R\approx h^2 (R+h) = \frac{GM}{\omega^2},$$whose solution is simply$$	h = \sqrt{\frac{GM}{R}} \frac{1}{\omega}.$$Lastly, $\omega$ has to be in units of radians per seconds, but this is not a good choice. Alternatively, I will want to express it in degrees per second, this should be roughly the angular distance of an index fingernail at an arms length per second, or half the size of your thumb per second. Let this new constant in degrees be $\omega_\text{deg}$, then we have$$	h = \frac{180^°}{\pi}\sqrt{\frac{GM}{R}} \frac{1}{\omega_\text{deg}}.$$Now we can plug in the values for all of those constants, I will use the values of $R = 6371 \, \mathrm{km}$ and $GM = 4 \cdot 10^5 \, \frac{\mathrm{km}^3}{\mathrm{s}^2}$. The final approximate solution for $h$ in kilometers is then$$	h = \frac{450^°}{\omega_\text{deg}}.$$This should be roughly applicable to satellites at a height of $200 \, \mathrm{km}$ to $1000 \, \mathrm{km}$ whose orbit is circular and that pass very nearly through the zenith. _So, as a quick rule of thumb you can just measure the apparent speed of a satellite in degreees per second and then divide $450$ by the this value! Go and have fun being able to measure hundreds of thousands of meters by just the breadth of your thumb._